# ADR-18 unit-e Transaction Types

```
Status:  Accepted
Created: 2018-11-02
Accepted: 2018-11-06

Changelog:
- 2018-11-02 created, covering Payment, Coinstake and Admin types
- 2018-11-06 accepted, covering Deposit, Vote, Logout, Slash, and Withdraw
```

## Context

bitcoin has an `int32_t` field that indicates a version number. bitcoin has only
one type of transactions. In unit-e there are several types of transactions. We
overloaded the version field of transactions to represent the transaction _version_
as a `uint16_t` as well as a transaction _type_.

This ADR's purpose is to clarify the different transaction types and their numeric
ids in the _transaction type_ field.

## Proposal

### Transaction Types

These are the transaction types and their numerical ids as distinguished so far.

```
0 Payment
1 Coinstake
2 Deposit
3 Vote
4 Logout
5 Slash
6 Withdraw
7 Admin
```

### (0) Payment Transaction Type

Payment Transactions look completely like any other bitcoin transaction.
Payment transactions can be standard as well as non-standard.

### (1) Coinstake Transaction Type

The first (zeroth) transaction in a block is called _coinbase_ transaction
in bitcoin and _coinstake_ transaction in unit-e. The _coinstake_ transaction
is explicitly marked as such.

The coinstake transaction looks much like a standard payment, except for the
first (zeroth) input "`vin[0]`". The first input does not refer to any output (this is
the same as in bitcoin). Thus `vin[0].prevout.hash` is always the hash which
is all zeroes (`00000000000000000000000000000000`). `vin[0].prevout.n` is set
to `0`.

The `scriptSig` of `vin[0]` must contain in exactly that order:

- the height of the block, serialized according to BIP34
- the utxo set hash upto the previous height, as outlined in ADR-11

The coinstake transaction must have at least two inputs and exactly one output.

`vin[1]` is the input which refers to the stake for proposing this block.
Additional inputs are not counted as stake. It is also only this input which
contributes to the values of the _kernel_ and the _stake modifier_ (same as
in particl). Additional input may be added to _zap_ coins into the single
output which can then be used as a bigger stake.

The single output is the value of the inputs combined + the reward + the fees
earned from this block.

Coinstake transactions have a very strict layout. There is no notion of
standard or non-standard for coinstake transactions as they are not relayed
by the P2P network but created and directly included by a proposer when
building a block.

There must be one and only one coinstake transaction in each block and it must
be the first (`vin[0]`).

### (2) Deposit

Deposit transactions are the mean through which validator get included in the
validator set. Their purpose is to lock the validator funds so that in case
of misbehaviour this can be slashed.

A deposit transaction can have at most 2 outputs: the first (`vout[0]`) must
be a deposit output containing the so called PAYVOTESLASH script, the second,
if present must be the change output. The transaction can contain fees as
normal.

A `PAYVOTESLASH` script is composed by 3 sections where the first is a vote
script that let the validator spend the transaction if they provide a valid
vote. The second is a simple P2PKH script that let the validator to withdraw the
 funds. The last part of the script let anybody with a proof of a validator's
wrongdoing to punish him effectively spending the whole deposit. For more
details see the description of the other finalization related transactions
below.

### (3) Vote

Vote transactions are the mean through which the validator commits to a specific
 history of the blockchain.

The structure of this transaction is very strict:
- it must contain one single input, spending a previous deposit, vote or logout
transaction.
- it must contain one single output with the same value of the transaction spent
 and the same script (a `PAYVOTESLASH`).
- no fees are allowed.

### (4) Logout

Logout transactions are the mean through which a validator can start the process
to be excluded from the validator set and retrieve its funds.

The structure of this transaction is very strict:
- it must contain one single input, spending a previous deposit or vote
transaction.
- it must contain one single output with the same value of the transaction spent
 and the same script (a `PAYVOTESLASH`).

### (5) Slash

Logout transactions are the mean through which anybody can punish a validator
who broke the protocol rules by sending illegal votes.

The structure of this transaction is very strict:
- it must contain one single input, spending a previous deposit, vote or logout
transaction and containing the proof of the misbehaviour (the two offending
 votes signed by the offender).
- it must contain at least 1 output  burning 96% of the current validator
deposit (it might be more that the simple value of the previous transaction as
this must account for possible rewards accumulated so far by the validator).
- it can then contain various other outputs to distribute the remaining 4%.

### (6) Withdraw

Logout transactions are the mean through which a validator can recover the
funds it locked with the initial deposit transaction.

The structure of this transaction is very strict:
- it must contain one single input, spending a previous logout or vote
transaction.
- it can contain a single output that contains a P2PKH script to the same
address that made the initial deposit.

### (7) Admin

Admin transactions are commands which can be sent while the network is in
permissioned mode. They affect the validator set only. After the network is
fully opened and anyone can become a validator admin commands will be
rejected. The details of this mechanism and the layout of these transactions
are defined in [ADR-9](https://github.com/dtr-org/unit-e-docs/blob/master/adrs/2018-10-02-ADR-9%20Validator%20permissioning%20specification.md).

## Decision

This ADR is mostly informational. The transaction types as described here
are [already part of the unit-e codebase](https://github.com/dtr-org/unit-e/blob/master/src/primitives/txtype.h).

In contrast to other ADRs this ADR is going to be updated with newly added
transaction types, should we add more transaction types.
