# ADR-21 Transfer Esperanza Transactions

```
Status:   Draft
Created:  2018-11-08
```

*Note: this document is actively being developed and might be changed*

It's the second version of the document, [see previous
one](https://github.com/dtr-org/unit-e-docs/pull/59).

*TODO: describe push messaging*

## Context

We're implementing a Casper-inspired finalization protocol named Esperanza. As
part of the protocol we need to adapt [fork choice rule](ADR-0012.md), a
significant portion of that change is to follow the longest justified chain. To
represent justification and finalization, we have the finalization state for
every chain which is based on transactions of blocks that belong to the chain.

To explain the problem imagine Node A has the longest chain and Node B has the
shortest but recently justified one. Nodes were disconnected/unsynced, so were
able to build different chains, and eventually get connected to each other.


```
main finalized root
     ∨
     R ... - A1 - A2 - A3 - A4 - A5   Node A
     ------------------------------
            \
             B1 - B2 - B3             Node B
                   ^
                justified
```

According to the fork-choice rule, after being connected Node A must switch to
longest justified chain with tip B3. To calculate B3's finalization state Node A
needs Esperanza transactions for blocks B1, B2, and B3. The current p2p
implementation which is taken from bitcoin prohibits this as it won't download
B1, B2, and B3 blocks since their tip's Work is less than the work of A5.

This document proposes to add new pull-like commands to retrieve headers and
Esperanza transactions (which we'd name Commits below) for epochs which might be
used as a trigger to start downloading the whole blocks in order to change to
the longest justified chain.

Esperanza transactions (Commits) are:

* DEPOSIT
* VOTE
* LOGOUT
* SLASH
* WITHDRAW
* ADMIN

## Decision

We add a new mechanism of headers-and-commits exchange which would allow peers to
download headers and commits incrementally, dynasty by dynasty. Once a node receives
the bunch of headers-and-commits, it can decide to download corresponding blocks,
validate it, and continue the process, or to reject it.

### getcommits message

Request block headers and corresponding commits from the most recent block hash
until one of the termination conditions depends on what happened first:

* the next finalized checkpoint,
* the end of the main chain in case of no finalization found,
* the `stop` block hash.

The node should respond *only* on the main chain.

 Size | Name             | Type              | Comments
 ---- | ---------------- | ------------------|----------
 1-4  | length           | var_int           | Length of the start vector
 ?    | start            | uchar[32][]       | Vector of block hashes, ascend order
 32   | stop             | uchar[32]         | 0x0 disables this termination condition

The behavior of `start` is similar to bitcoin's block locator. In the sync-mode
it makes sense to fill it with checkpoints in between last known finalization
point and most recent checkpoint, and keep stop=0x0.

*TODO: later it'd reused in PUSH.*

```
F -> ...blocks... -> C1 -> ...blocks... -> C2 -> ...blocks...

F is a finalized checkpoint
C1 and C2 are checkpoints (C1 is justified by definition).
```

If you want to ask for headers and commits after checkpoint C2, the node can use

```
getcommits
  length = 3
  start = [ F, C1, C2 ]
  stop = 0x0
```

When a peer receives such message, it scans the main chain starting from F to find C1
and C2. It replies with headers and commits next to the most recent checkpoint and
until the next finalization point or the tip, or `stop`.

In a green path when every checkpoint is finalized such request usually would
look like

```
getcommits
  length = 2
  checkpoints = [ F, C1 ]
  stop = 0x0
```

where C1 and F are respectively the last justified and the last finalized checkpoint.

### commits message

Response to `getcommits`.

 Size | Name                | Type                 | Comments
 ---- | ------------------- | -------------------- | --------
 1    | status              | uint8                | Status of reply, 0 = finalization or "stop" reached, 1 = tip reached, 2 - message length limit exceeded
 1-4  | length              | var_int              |
 ?    | headers_and_commits | header_and_commits[] |

When the message length limit exceeded, send the message and continue with a new
one; repeat until you reach the termination condition.

### header_and_commits type

 Size | Name             | Type              | Comments
 ---- | ---------------- | ----------------- | --------
 140  | header           | header            | Size is actual for time this document created
 1-4  | commits_length   | var_int           |
 ?    | commits          | tx[]              |

### header type

We extend the header type by adding commits merkle root hash.

*Note, this table might become outdated due to further protocol updates.*

 Size | Name                | Type              | Comments
 ---- | ------------------- | ----------------- | --------
 4    | version             | uint32            |
 32   | prev_block          | uchar[32]         |
 32   | merkle_root         | uchar[32]         | No change: all transactions including commits
 32   | witness_merkle_root | uchar[32]         | No change: all transactions including commits
 32   | merkle_root_commits | uchar[32]         | New field: merkle root hash of commits
 4    | timestamp           | uint32            |
 4    | bits                | uint32            |

## Examples

### Fork choice: full sync

```
main finalized root     checkpoints
     ∨                  ∨         ∨
     R0 - R1 - J - A1 - A2 - A3 - A4 - A5   Node A
     -----------------------------------------
                  \
                   B1 - B2 - B3             Node B
                        ^
                     justified

Items represent blocks.
R0 is finalized checkpoint.
J is justified checkpoint.
```

`Node A` syncs with `Node B` and have to switch to the longest justified chain, B3.

##### A->B: getcommits

```
getcommits
  length = 4
  start = [ R, J, A2, A4 ]
  stop = 0x0
```

##### B->A: commits

1. B finds R on the main chain.
2. B finds J on the main chain.
3. B doesn't find A2 on the main chain.
4. B prepares commits after J.

```
commits
  status = 0
  length = 3
  commits = [ commits(B1), commits(B2), commits(B3) ]
```

##### A: fork choice

1. A reconstructs finalization state for B3 on top of J
2. As B3 is longest justified chain, A downloads B1, B2, and B3 blocks and switches its main chain there.
